A means of expression

bq. Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration. 
- Thomas Edison

I've have the urge to start writing too many times now to ignore it any longer. It's a recurring feeling that relentlessly surfaces every few months and I think that I should really take notice this time. This is not my first attempt. It's not my second one either. I have started writing multiple times in the past, but for the wrong reasons and my efforts where always short lived. This time, I want to be serious about it. I want it to be hard work. I want to hate the thought of having to sit down and write. And this time, I'm going to love it.

It is important that I start by defining the reasons that drive me to write. When I usually sit down to put words down on paper, it is because I've been hit by inspiration, a bi-annual event that leaves me hopeful, but also very sad. Inspiration is a flicker, a tiny spark in my mind with immense emotional power. It'll drive me to sit down at the computer, write a few words, sign up on a blogging service, publish an article or two or three and... and then nothing. I let it fade away, waiting for the next burst of inspiration to hit me. Inspiration is what fuels the act of writing. But by the time I'm done typing inspiration is gone and all that remains is an emotional piece of malformed text. Not good enough to publish, without meat and flesh, just a collection of words that represent the initial idea, the seed of what could become something good.

Writing is painful, something I've said before on another blog or maybe even in a printed newspaper. I can't remember. What I can recall, however, is how easy it is when I get started. When my muse comes to visit, she gives me enough ideas to sustain me for a few weeks. But my muse must have other clients because she never sticks around very long and after she leaves my writing starts slowing down. Texts need to be revised and refined, ideas need to be fleshed out and arguments need to be structured. This is the reason I have a love/hate relationship with the quote I wrote at the top of this page. I agree with it entirely yet I can't bring myself to perspire for more than a month, after which my motivation fizzles out and I run out of unicorn juice.

I'm not the only one who finds the art of writing difficult. About a year ago I sat down and read "The War of Art: Break Through the Blocks and Win Your Inner Creative Battles" by Steven Pressfield. This book warns the reader against resistance and how it does its best to slow down any creative effort, unleashing a last resort all-or-nothing battle against us when projects near completion to try and make us fail. As someone who has a hard time finishing, or just even reaching a stage where the finish line is in sight, this was revelatory. I must be careful, however, to not use resistance as an excuse for failure. I should instead, and rightly, blame myself. I could draw some strength from George R.R. Martin, author of the Game of Thrones series, who claims to not like the act of writing, but instead enjoys having written.

Creativity is hard work. I've heard or read this over and over again. Michael Ruhlman, a successful food author (he's written the cookbooks for most of the best chefs in this country, appeared multiple times as a judge on Iron Chef America and ended up good buddies with Anthony Bourdain,) makes a point of writing everyday. Jerry Seinfeld does the exact same thing but keeps track of his efforts by drawing a line across his calendar for every day that he writes. By working everyday, that line becomes continuous and the longer it becomes, the less you're inclined to skip a day and break it. Don't break the chain! I'm not sure what my technique will be, but it must involve writing as close to every day as possible. Maybe I should publish something every week, which is not an unreasonable goal.

So I ask: why do I want to write? There must exist a deep emotional need that I'm trying to fill, otherwise this urge would not be coming back as often as it does. I do not seek to build an audience nor to influence my readers, although I'll admit that this used to be a goal of mine. This time, however, I do not care about shaping other people's opinions, which I believe I tried to do to validate my own thoughts and solidify my self-confidence. I must have grown out of that because I do not feel I need readers to strengthen my inner-self. The only other explanation that I can think of is that I'm simply trying to express myself. I've always thought I was a creative person doing somewhat scientific work (if I may call computer programming scientific) but without any real skill to create anything. I tried drawing and balked at the thought of sitting down for hours to make anything worthwhile. I tried music but I'm stuck repeating other people's work. With writing, however, anything is original, creative and still appeals to the left side of my brain. Also, writing will help me organize my thoughts and emotions. I usually have some vague intuitions about various subjects that, when probed, I can't explain. I'm hoping to change that and dive deeper into these intuitions by sitting down and thinking about them.

I want to write because the act of creation is very appealing to me and words are the construct of my thoughts, which I like to analyze to extract insight from them. 

There. I could have simply written that line and be done with it, but where's the fun in that?
